README.md, before:

# colabfit-tools
Tools for constructing and manipulating datasets for fitting interatomic potentials

# Installation

Using `pip`:
```
pip install git+https://github.com/colabfit/colabfit-tools.git@master
```

You should also follow the instructions in the documentation for [installing and running a Mongo server](https://colabfit.github.io/colabfit-tools/html/getting_started.html#installing-mongo)

# Documentation
The documentation can be found online at https://colabfit.github.io/colabfit-tools/.

# Example data
Contact [Eric](https://github.com/EFuem/) if you would like access to the datasets associated with [the provided examples](examples).

# License
The ColabFit Tools package is copyrighted by the Regents of the University of
Minnesota. It can be freely used for educational and research purposes by
non-profit institutions and US government agencies only. Other organizations are
allowed to use the ColabFit Tools package only for evaluation purposes, and any
further uses will require prior approval. The software may not be sold or
redistributed without prior approval. One may make copies of the software for
their use provided that the copies, are not sold or distributed, are used under
the same terms and conditions. As unestablished research software, this code is
provided on an "as is'' basis without warranty of any kind, either expressed or
implied. The downloading, or executing any part of this software constitutes an
implicit agreement to these terms. These terms and conditions are subject to
change at any time without prior notice.

Commit message:

Update readme in interim for non-mongo

README.md, after:

# colabfit-tools
Tools for constructing and manipulating datasets for fitting interatomic potentials

# Installation

Using `pip`:
```
pip install git+https://github.com/colabfit/colabfit-tools.git@master
```

colabfit-tools is built to work with two back ends: Vast DB (as part of the NYU-HPC Data Lake) and PostGreSQL.  
  
The Vast DB version of colabfit-tools is built to manage the [ColabFit Exchange](www.colabfit.org)
  
Individual users should use the PostGreSQL version.  
Documentation for the PostGreSQL version will be forthcoming.


# Documentation
The documentation can be found online at https://colabfit.github.io/colabfit-tools/.

# Example data
Contact [Eric](https://github.com/EFuem/) if you would like access to the datasets associated with [the provided examples](examples).

# License
The ColabFit Tools package is copyrighted by the Regents of the University of
Minnesota. It can be freely used for educational and research purposes by
non-profit institutions and US government agencies only. Other organizations are
allowed to use the ColabFit Tools package only for evaluation purposes, and any
further uses will require prior approval. The software may not be sold or
redistributed without prior approval. One may make copies of the software for
their use provided that the copies, are not sold or distributed, are used under
the same terms and conditions. As unestablished research software, this code is
provided on an "as is'' basis without warranty of any kind, either expressed or
implied. The downloading, or executing any part of this software constitutes an
implicit agreement to these terms. These terms and conditions are subject to
change at any time without prior notice.
