docs/source/database_structure.rst, before:

==================
Database structure
==================

.. figure:: ds_diagram_cropped.png
    :width: 593
    :height: 677
    :align: center
    :alt: A diagram showing the relationship between the five core data structures that make up a Database.

    A diagram showing the relationship between the five core data structures
    that make up a Database.

The Database structure was designed to be able to be as flexible as possible to
incorporate different types of data (computational/experimental) while also
making the datasets efficient to query, store, and manipulate. A Database is
stored as a Mongo database with  five core data structures:

* :class:`~colabfit.tools.configuration.Configuration` (CO, :code:`collection_name='configurations'`):
    The information necessary to uniquely define the input to a material
    property calculation or the atomic geometry present in an experimental
    measurement. At a minimum, a configuration must include the atomic species
    and nuclear positions. In the case of periodic or semi-periodic systems,
    the simulation cell vectors must also be included. Information related to
    atomic charges, magnetic moments, and electric dipoles/quadrupoles may
    optionally be specified, and may serve either as constraints on a
    first-principles model or as inputs to an effective model. Additional
    metadata related to the configuration can also be provided (e.g., the parent
    structure from which it was generated by perturbing its positions).
* :class:`~colabfit.tools.property.Property` (PR, :code:`collection_name='properties'`):
      The outputs from a material property calculation, e.g. DFT-computed
      energy/forces/stress, or experimental measurement. A property points to
      one or more individual :class:`Configuration`
      instances; if the :class:`Configuration` objects that a property points to
      contain optional inputs such as charges or magnetic moments, then the
      property must contain an associated output value for each of them (in the
      event that these inputs serve as constraints, the output values will be
      equal to the input values). Generally, it is best practice for a property
      to point to a :class:`PropertySettings` object.
* :class:`~colabfit.tools.property_settings.PropertySettings` (PS, :code:`collection_name='property_settings'`):
      Additional metadata useful for setting up the calculation or experiment
      (e.g., the name of the software package(s) used, their versions, input
      files, experimental method or devices, etc.).
* :class:`~colabfit.tools.configuration_sets.ConfigurationSet` (CS, :code:`collection_name='configuration_sets'`):
      An object defining a group of one or more :class:`Configuration` instances
      and providing useful metadata for organizing datasets (e.g., "Snapshots
      from a molecular dynamics run at 1000K").
* :class:`~colabfit.tools.dataset.Dataset` (DS, :code:`collection_name='datasets'`):
      An object used to effectively aggregate information from all of the data
      structures defined above to create a body of information that provides a
      complete, discoverable training set. A :class:`Dataset` points to one or more
      :class:`ConfigurationSet` objects, one or more :class:`Property` objects,
      and one or more other :class:`Dataset` objects.

Commit message:

Update docs with Property Definitions

docs/source/database_structure.rst, after:

==================
Database structure
==================

.. figure:: ds_diagram_cropped.png
    :width: 626
    :height: 703
    :align: center
    :alt: A diagram showing the relationship between the five core data structures that make up a Database.

    A diagram showing the relationship between the five core data structures
    that make up a Database.

The Database structure was designed to be able to be as flexible as possible to
incorporate different types of data (computational/experimental) while also
making the datasets efficient to query, store, and manipulate. A Database is
stored as a Mongo database with  five core data structures:

* :class:`~colabfit.tools.configuration.Configuration` (CO, :code:`collection_name='configurations'`):
    The information necessary to uniquely define the input to a material
    property calculation or the atomic geometry present in an experimental
    measurement. At a minimum, a configuration must include the atomic species
    and nuclear positions. In the case of periodic or semi-periodic systems,
    the simulation cell vectors must also be included. Information related to
    atomic charges, magnetic moments, and electric dipoles/quadrupoles may
    optionally be specified, and may serve either as constraints on a
    first-principles model or as inputs to an effective model. Additional
    metadata related to the configuration can also be provided (e.g., the parent
    structure from which it was generated by perturbing its positions).
* :class:`~colabfit.tools.property.Property` (PR, :code:`collection_name='properties'`):
      The outputs from a material property calculation, e.g. DFT-computed
      energy/forces/stress, or experimental measurement. A property points to
      one or more individual :class:`Configuration`
      instances; if the :class:`Configuration` objects that a property points to
      contain optional inputs such as charges or magnetic moments, then the
      property must contain an associated output value for each of them (in the
      event that these inputs serve as constraints, the output values will be
      equal to the input values). Generally, it is best practice for a property
      to point to a :class:`PropertySettings` object.
* :class:`Property Definition` (PD, :code:`collection_name='property_definitions'`):
      A Python dictionary that specifies details about the contents of a
      Property, including the name of the property type, a description of the
      property, and information about each of the computed fields in the
      property (data type, data shape, if the field has units, if the field is
      required, and a human-readable description of the field).
* :class:`~colabfit.tools.property_settings.PropertySettings` (PS, :code:`collection_name='property_settings'`):
      Additional metadata useful for setting up the calculation or experiment
      (e.g., the name of the software package(s) used, their versions, input
      files, experimental method or devices, etc.).
* :class:`~colabfit.tools.configuration_sets.ConfigurationSet` (CS, :code:`collection_name='configuration_sets'`):
      An object defining a group of one or more :class:`Configuration` instances
      and providing useful metadata for organizing datasets (e.g., "Snapshots
      from a molecular dynamics run at 1000K").
* :class:`~colabfit.tools.dataset.Dataset` (DS, :code:`collection_name='datasets'`):
      An object used to effectively aggregate information from all of the data
      structures defined above to create a body of information that provides a
      complete, discoverable training set. A :class:`Dataset` points to one or more
      :class:`ConfigurationSet` objects, one or more :class:`Property` objects,
      and one or more other :class:`Dataset` objects.
