docs/source/usage.rst, before:

=====
Usage
=====

This section describes the core usage of the :code:`colabfit-tools` package.

Parsing data
============

Properties can be added into the Database is by creating or loading a
Configuration object, attaching the Property data to the :attr:`info`
and/or :attr:`arrays` dictionaries of the Configuration (see :ref:`here
<Configuration info and arrays fields>` for more details), then using the
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_data` method.

In addition to the Configuration with attached Property information, 
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_data` will also require a
property map describing how to map the attached Property information onto an
existing property definition (see :ref:`Property definitions`).

A property map should have the following structure:

.. code-block:: python
    
    {
        <property_name>: {
            <property_field>: {
                'field': <key_for_info_or_arrays>,
                'units': <ase_readable_units>
            }
        }
    }

See below for the definitions of each of the above keys/values:

* :attr:`<property_name>` should be one of the following:

    1. The name of an OpenKIM Property Definition from the `list of approved OpenKIM Property Definitions <https://openkim.org/properties>`_
    2. The name of a locally-defined property (see :ref:`Property definitions`)
       that has been added using
       :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_property_definition`

* :attr:`<property_field>` should be the name of a field from an property
  definition
* :attr:`<key_for_info_or_arrays>` should be a key for indexing the :attr:`info` or
  :attr:`arrays` dictionaries on a Configuration (see :ref:`Configuration info and
  arrays fields`)
* :attr:`'field'` is used to specify the key for extracting the property from
  :attr:`Configuration.info` or :attr:`Configuartion.arrays`.
* :attr:`'units'` should be a string matching one of the units names in
  `ase.units <https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/units.html>`_.

Note that :meth:`insert_data` will attempt to load every Property specified in
:code:`property_map` for each Configuration. This means that if there are
:code:`P` properties in :code:`property_map` and :code:`C` Configurations, a
maximum of `P*C` Properties will be loaded in total. If a Configuration does not
have the necessary data for loading a given Property, that Property is skipped
for the given Configuration and a warning is raised.

Detecting duplicates
====================

All entities in the Database (Configuration, Property, PropertySetting,
ConfigurationSet, and Dataset) are stored with a unique ID that is generated by
hashing the corresponding entity (see the documentation for their respective
hash functions for more detail). Because of this, if two entities are identical,
they will only be stored once in the Database. This can be useful when trying to
remove duplicate data in a Dataset, as it ensures that no duplicates are added
during :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_data`.

For example, this enables a user to take advantage of the Mongo
:meth:`count_documents` function to see if a Configuration is linked to more
than one Property

.. code-block:: python

    client.configurations.count_documents(
        {'relationships.properties.2': {'$exists': True}}
    )

Similarly, the :code:`'relationships'` fields of entities can be used to check
if two Datasets have any common Configurations.

Synchronizing a Dataset
=======================
When working with a Dataset, it is important to make sure that the dataset has
been "synchronized" in order to ensure that all of the data (configuration
labels, configuration sets, aggregated metadata, ...) have been properly updated
to reflect any recent changes to the Dataset.

There are three points in the Database where data aggregation is performed (and
thus where care must be taken to ensure synchronization):

* ConfigurationSets aggregating Configuration information
  (:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.aggregate_configuration_info`)
* Datasets aggregating ConfigurationSet information 
  (:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.aggregate_configuration_set_info`)
* Datasets aggregating Property information 
  (:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.aggregate_property_info`)

Synchronization can be performed by using the :code:`resync=True` argument when
calling :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.get_configuration_set` and
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.get_dataset`. Aggregation is
automatically performed when inserting ConfigurationSets. Aggregation is *not*
automatically performed when inserting Datasets in order to avoid re-aggregating
ConfigurationSet information unnecessarily; therefore :code:`resync=True` may
also be used for :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_dataset`.

In order to re-synchronize the entities without using the :meth:`get_*` methods,
call the :meth:`aggregate_*` methods directly. A common scenario where this may
be necessary is when using
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.apply_labels` in order to make
sure that the changes are reflected in the ConfigurationSets and Datasets.

Applying configuration labels
=============================

Configuration labels should be applied using the
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.apply_labels` method.

An example :attr:`configuration_label_regexes`:

.. code-block:: python

    client.apply_labels(
        dataset_id=ds_id,
        collection_name='configurations',
        query={'nsites': {'$lt': 100}},
        labels={'small'},
        verbose=True
    )

See :ref:`the Si PRX GAP tutorial <Manually applied Configuration labels>` for a
more complete example.

Building configuration sets
===========================

There are two steps to building a ConfigurationSet:

First, extracting the IDs of the Configurations that should be included in the
ConfigurationSet:

.. code-block:: python

    co_ids = client.get_data(
        'configurations',
        fields='_id',
        query={'_id': {'$in': <all_co_ids_in_dataset>}, 'nsites': {'$lt': 100}},
        ravel=True
    ).tolist()

And second, calling
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_configuration_set`:

.. code-block:: python

    cs_id = client.insert_configuration_set(
        co_ids,
        description='Configurations with fewer than 100 atoms'
    )

Note that in the first step, :code:`'_id': {'$in': <all_co_ids_in_dataset>}` is
used in order to limit the query to include only the Configurations within a
given Dataset, rather than all of the Configurations in the entire Database.

See :ref:`the Si PRX GAP tutorial <Manually constructed ConfigurationSets>` for
a more complete example.

Attaching property settings
===========================

A :class:`~colabfit.tools.property_settings.PropertySettings` object can be
attached to a Property by specifying the :code:`property_settings` argument
in :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_data`.

.. code-block:: python

    pso = PropertySettings(
        method='VASP',
        description='A basic VASP calculation',
        files=None,
        labels=['PBE', 'GGA'],
    )

    client.insert_data(
        images,
        property_map=...,
        property_settings={
            <property_name>: pso,
        }
    )

Data exploration
================

The :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.get_data`,
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.plot_histograms`,
and :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.get_statistics` functions can
be extremely useful for quickly visualizing your data and detecting outliers.

.. code-block:: python

    energies = client.get_data('properties', '<property_name>.energy', ravel=True)
    forces   = client.get_data('properties', '<property_name>.forces', concatenate=True)

.. code-block:: python
    
    # From the QM9 example

	client.get_statistics(
		['qm9-property.a', 'qm9-property.b', 'qm9-property.c'],
		ids=dataset.property_ids,
		verbose=True
	)

	client.plot_histograms(
		['qm9-property.a', 'qm9-property.b', 'qm9-property.c',],
		ids=dataset.property_ids
	)

.. image:: qm9_histograms.png
    :align: center

See the :ref:`QM9 example` and the :ref:`Si PRX GAP example` to further explore
the benefits of these functions.

Filtering a Dataset
===================

Datasets can be easily filtered to remove unwanted entries or extract subsets of
interest. Filtering can be done using the
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.filter_on_properties` or
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.filter_on_configurations`
methods.

.. code-block:: python

    # From the QM9 example

    clean_config_sets, clean_property_ids = client.filter_on_properties(
        ds_id=ds_id,
        filter_fxn=lambda x: (x['qm9-property']['a']['source-value'] < 20)
            and x['qm9-property']['b']['source-value'] < 10,
        fields=['qm9-property.a.source-value', 'qm9-property.b.source-value'],
        verbose=True
    )

Note the use of the :code:`ds_id` argument, which makes sure that the returned
ConfigurationSet IDs and Property IDs are only those that are contained within
the given Dataset.

Data transformations
====================

It is often necessary to transform the data in a Dataset in order to improve
performance when fitting models to the data, or to convert the data into a
different format. This can be done using the
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.apply_transformation` function:

.. code-block:: python

	# Convert to per-atom energies
	client.apply_transformation(
		dataset_id=ds_id,
		property_ids=all_pr_ids,
		update_map={
			'energy-forces.energy':
			lambda f, doc: f/doc['configuration']['nsites']
		},
		configuration_ids=all_co_ids,
	)

Note the use of :code:`dataset_id`, which serves as a safety measure to ensure
that only the properties of the given Dataset are updated.

Supported file formats
======================

Ideally, raw data should be stored in `Extended XYZ format
<https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/io/formatoptions.html#extxyz>`_. This is the
default format used by :code:`colabfit-tools`, and should be suitable for almost
all use cases. CFG files (used by Moment Tensor Potentials) are also supported,
but are not recommended.

Data that is in a custom format (e.g., JSON, HDF5, ...) that cannot be easily
read by
`ase.io.read <https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/io/io.html#ase.io.read>`_ will
require the use of a :class:`~colabfit.tools.converters.FolderConverter`
instance, which needs to be supplied with a custom :meth:`reader` function for
parsing the data.

Commit message:

Move transform; work on insert_data generator

docs/source/usage.rst, after:

=====
Usage
=====

This section describes the core usage of the :code:`colabfit-tools` package.

Parsing data
============

Properties can be added into the Database is by creating or loading a
Configuration object, attaching the Property data to the :attr:`info`
and/or :attr:`arrays` dictionaries of the Configuration (see :ref:`here
<Configuration info and arrays fields>` for more details), then using the
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_data` method.

In addition to the Configuration with attached Property information, 
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_data` will also require a
property map describing how to map the attached Property information onto an
existing property definition (see :ref:`Property definitions`).

A property map should have the following structure:

.. code-block:: python
    
    {
        <property_name>: {
            <property_field>: {
                'field': <key_for_info_or_arrays>,
                'units': <ase_readable_units>
            }
        }
    }

See below for the definitions of each of the above keys/values:

* :attr:`<property_name>` should be one of the following:

    1. The name of an OpenKIM Property Definition from the `list of approved OpenKIM Property Definitions <https://openkim.org/properties>`_
    2. The name of a locally-defined property (see :ref:`Property definitions`)
       that has been added using
       :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_property_definition`

* :attr:`<property_field>` should be the name of a field from an property
  definition
* :attr:`<key_for_info_or_arrays>` should be a key for indexing the :attr:`info` or
  :attr:`arrays` dictionaries on a Configuration (see :ref:`Configuration info and
  arrays fields`)
* :attr:`'field'` is used to specify the key for extracting the property from
  :attr:`Configuration.info` or :attr:`Configuartion.arrays`.
* :attr:`'units'` should be a string matching one of the units names in
  `ase.units <https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/units.html>`_.

Note that :meth:`insert_data` will attempt to load every Property specified in
:code:`property_map` for each Configuration. This means that if there are
:code:`P` properties in :code:`property_map` and :code:`C` Configurations, a
maximum of `P*C` Properties will be loaded in total. If a Configuration does not
have the necessary data for loading a given Property, that Property is skipped
for the given Configuration and a warning is raised.

Detecting duplicates
====================

All entities in the Database (Configuration, Property, PropertySetting,
ConfigurationSet, and Dataset) are stored with a unique ID that is generated by
hashing the corresponding entity (see the documentation for their respective
hash functions for more detail). Because of this, if two entities are identical,
they will only be stored once in the Database. This can be useful when trying to
remove duplicate data in a Dataset, as it ensures that no duplicates are added
during :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_data`.

For example, this enables a user to take advantage of the Mongo
:meth:`count_documents` function to see if a Configuration is linked to more
than one Property

.. code-block:: python

    client.configurations.count_documents(
        {'relationships.properties.2': {'$exists': True}}
    )

Similarly, the :code:`'relationships'` fields of entities can be used to check
if two Datasets have any common Configurations.

Synchronizing a Dataset
=======================
When working with a Dataset, it is important to make sure that the dataset has
been "synchronized" in order to ensure that all of the data (configuration
labels, configuration sets, aggregated metadata, ...) have been properly updated
to reflect any recent changes to the Dataset.

There are three points in the Database where data aggregation is performed (and
thus where care must be taken to ensure synchronization):

* ConfigurationSets aggregating Configuration information
  (:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.aggregate_configuration_info`)
* Datasets aggregating ConfigurationSet information 
  (:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.aggregate_configuration_set_info`)
* Datasets aggregating Property information 
  (:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.aggregate_property_info`)

Synchronization can be performed by using the :code:`resync=True` argument when
calling :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.get_configuration_set` and
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.get_dataset`. Aggregation is
automatically performed when inserting ConfigurationSets. Aggregation is *not*
automatically performed when inserting Datasets in order to avoid re-aggregating
ConfigurationSet information unnecessarily; therefore :code:`resync=True` may
also be used for :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_dataset`.

In order to re-synchronize the entities without using the :meth:`get_*` methods,
call the :meth:`aggregate_*` methods directly. A common scenario where this may
be necessary is when using
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.apply_labels` in order to make
sure that the changes are reflected in the ConfigurationSets and Datasets.

Applying configuration labels
=============================

Configuration labels should be applied using the
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.apply_labels` method.

An example :attr:`configuration_label_regexes`:

.. code-block:: python

    client.apply_labels(
        dataset_id=ds_id,
        collection_name='configurations',
        query={'nsites': {'$lt': 100}},
        labels={'small'},
        verbose=True
    )

See :ref:`the Si PRX GAP tutorial <Manually applied Configuration labels>` for a
more complete example.

Building configuration sets
===========================

There are two steps to building a ConfigurationSet:

First, extracting the IDs of the Configurations that should be included in the
ConfigurationSet:

.. code-block:: python

    co_ids = client.get_data(
        'configurations',
        fields='_id',
        query={'_id': {'$in': <all_co_ids_in_dataset>}, 'nsites': {'$lt': 100}},
        ravel=True
    ).tolist()

And second, calling
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_configuration_set`:

.. code-block:: python

    cs_id = client.insert_configuration_set(
        co_ids,
        description='Configurations with fewer than 100 atoms'
    )

Note that in the first step, :code:`'_id': {'$in': <all_co_ids_in_dataset>}` is
used in order to limit the query to include only the Configurations within a
given Dataset, rather than all of the Configurations in the entire Database.

See :ref:`the Si PRX GAP tutorial <Manually constructed ConfigurationSets>` for
a more complete example.

Attaching property settings
===========================

A :class:`~colabfit.tools.property_settings.PropertySettings` object can be
attached to a Property by specifying the :code:`property_settings` argument
in :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.insert_data`.

.. code-block:: python

    pso = PropertySettings(
        method='VASP',
        description='A basic VASP calculation',
        files=None,
        labels=['PBE', 'GGA'],
    )

    client.insert_data(
        images,
        property_map=...,
        property_settings={
            <property_name>: pso,
        }
    )

Data exploration
================

The :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.get_data`,
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.plot_histograms`,
and :meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.get_statistics` functions can
be extremely useful for quickly visualizing your data and detecting outliers.

.. code-block:: python

    energies = client.get_data('properties', '<property_name>.energy', ravel=True)
    forces   = client.get_data('properties', '<property_name>.forces', concatenate=True)

.. code-block:: python
    
    # From the QM9 example

	client.get_statistics(
		['qm9-property.a', 'qm9-property.b', 'qm9-property.c'],
		ids=dataset.property_ids,
		verbose=True
	)

	client.plot_histograms(
		['qm9-property.a', 'qm9-property.b', 'qm9-property.c',],
		ids=dataset.property_ids
	)

.. image:: qm9_histograms.png
    :align: center

See the :ref:`QM9 example` and the :ref:`Si PRX GAP example` to further explore
the benefits of these functions.

Filtering a Dataset
===================

Datasets can be easily filtered to remove unwanted entries or extract subsets of
interest. Filtering can be done using the
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.filter_on_properties` or
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.MongoDatabase.filter_on_configurations`
methods.

.. code-block:: python

    # From the QM9 example

    clean_config_sets, clean_property_ids = client.filter_on_properties(
        ds_id=ds_id,
        filter_fxn=lambda x: (x['qm9-property']['a']['source-value'] < 20)
            and x['qm9-property']['b']['source-value'] < 10,
        fields=['qm9-property.a.source-value', 'qm9-property.b.source-value'],
        verbose=True
    )

Note the use of the :code:`ds_id` argument, which makes sure that the returned
ConfigurationSet IDs and Property IDs are only those that are contained within
the given Dataset.

Data transformations
====================

It is often necessary to transform the data in a Dataset in order to improve
performance when fitting models to the data, or to convert the data into a
different format. This can be done using the `transfom` argument of the
:meth:`~colabfit.tools.database.insert_data` function. The `transform` argument
should be a callable function that modifies the Configuration in-place:

.. code-block:: python

    def per_atom(c):
        c.info['energy'] /= len(c)

    client.insert_data(
        configurations,
        property_map=property_map,
        property_settings=property_settings,
        transform=per_atom,
    )

Supported file formats
======================

Ideally, raw data should be stored in `Extended XYZ format
<https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/io/formatoptions.html#extxyz>`_. This is the
default format used by :code:`colabfit-tools`, and should be suitable for almost
all use cases. CFG files (used by Moment Tensor Potentials) are also supported,
but are not recommended.

Data that is in a custom format (e.g., JSON, HDF5, ...) that cannot be easily
read by
`ase.io.read <https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/io/io.html#ase.io.read>`_ will
require the use of a :class:`~colabfit.tools.converters.FolderConverter`
instance, which needs to be supplied with a custom :meth:`reader` function for
parsing the data.
